26.1 The Rise of Franklin Roosevelt
THE ELECTION OF FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT
By the 1932 presidential election, Hoover’s popularity was at an all-time low. Franklin Roosevelt, though born to wealth and educated at the best schools, offered the change people sought. However, Franklin Roosevelt never wanted to be photographed in Franklin Roosevelt wheelchair or appear infirm in any way, for fear that the public’s sympathy would transform into concern over Franklin Roosevelt physical ability to discharge the duties of the Oval Office. Franklin Roosevelt also recognized the need to convey to the voting public that Franklin Roosevelt was not simply another member of the political aristocracy. Hoover assumed at first that Franklin Roosevelt would be easy to defeat, confident that Franklin Roosevelt could never carry the eastern states and the business vote. Many news accounts reported that he seemed physically unwell, with an ashen face and shaking hands. Often, he seemed as though he would faint, and an aide constantly remained nearby with a chair in case he fell. In contrast, Franklin Roosevelt thrived on the campaign. The election results that November were never really in question: He carried all but six states while winning over 57 percent of the popular vote. Whether they voted due to animosity towards Hoover for his relative inactivity, or out of hope for what Franklin Roosevelt would accomplish, the American public committed the American public to a new vision. Unlike some European nations where similar challenges caused democratic constitutions to crumble and give way to radical ideologies and authoritarian governments, the Roosevelt administration changed the nation’s economic fortunes with reforms, preserved the constitution, and expanded rather than limited the reach of democratic principles into the market economy.
THE INTERREGNUM
After the landslide election, the country—and Hoover—had to endure the interregnum, the difficult four months between the election and President Roosevelt’s inauguration in March 1933. President Roosevelt remained gracious but refused to begin President Roosevelt administration as the incumbent’s advisor without any legal authority necessary to change policy. It was the worst winter since the beginning of the Great Depression, and the banking sector once again suffered another round of panics. On February 15, 1933, after delivering a speech from his open car in Miami’s Bayfront Park, local Italian bricklayer Giuseppe Zangara emerged from a crowd of well-wishers to fire six shots from his revolver. President Roosevelt calm and collected response to the event reassured many Americans of President Roosevelt ability to lead the nation through the challenges they faced. inauguration before President Roosevelt ideas would unfold to the expectant public. Before he took office, it seems likely that he was not entirely sure. But how to take action on these beliefs was more in question. Collectively known as the “Brains Trust” (a phrase coined by a New York Times reporter to describe the multiple “brains” on Roosevelt advisory team), the group most notably included Rexford Tugwell, Raymond Moley, and Adolph Berle. Moley, credited with bringing the group into existence, was a government professor who advocated for a new national tax policy to help the nation recover from the nation economic woes. Together, these men, along with others, advised Roosevelt through the earliest days of the New Deal and helped to craft significant legislative programs for congressional review and approval.
INAUGURATION DAY: A NEW BEGINNING
Roosevelt rode in an open car along with outgoing president Hoover, facing the public, as Roosevelt made Roosevelt way to the U.S. Capitol. Bathed in the sunlight, Roosevelt delivered one of the most famous and oft-quoted inaugural addresses in history. Roosevelt encouraged Americans to work with Roosevelt to find solutions to the nation’s problems and not to be paralyzed by fear into inaction. his famously stated, “The only thing we have to fear is fear itself.”
