6.4 Identity during the American Revolution

LOYALISTS
Historians disagree on what percentage of colonists were Loyalists; estimates range from 20 percent to
over 30 percent. In general, however, of British America’s population of 2.5 million, roughly one-third
remained loyal to Great Britain, while another third committed themselves to the cause of independence.
The remaining third remained apathetic, content to continue with their daily lives as best they could and
preferring not to engage in the struggle.
Many Loyalists were royal officials and merchants with extensive business ties to Great Britain, who
viewed themselves as the rightful and just defenders of the British constitution. Others simply resented
local business and political rivals who supported the Revolution, viewing the rebels as hypocrites and
schemers who selfishly used the break with the Empire to increase their fortunes. In New York’s Hudson
Valley, animosity among the tenants of estates owned by Revolutionary leaders turned them to the cause
of King and Empire.
During the war, all the states passed confiscation acts, which gave the new revolutionary governments
in the former colonies the right to seize Loyalist land and property. To ferret out Loyalists, revolutionary
governments also passed laws requiring the male population to take oaths of allegiance to the new states.
Those who refused lost their property and were often imprisoned or made to work for the new local
revolutionary order.
William Franklin, Benjamin Franklin’s only surviving son, remained loyal to Crown and Empire and
served as royal governor of New Jersey, a post he secured with his father’s help. During the war,
revolutionaries imprisoned William in Connecticut; however, he remained steadfast in his allegiance to
Great Britain and moved to England after the Revolution. He and his father never reconciled.
As many as nineteen thousand colonists served the British in the effort to put down the rebellion, and
after the Revolution, as many as 100,000 colonists left, moving to England or north to Canada rather than
staying in the new United States (Figure 6.18). Eight thousand whites and five thousand free blacks went
to Britain. Over thirty thousand went to Canada, transforming that nation from predominately French to
predominantly British. Another sizable group of Loyalists went to the British West Indies, taking their
slaves with them.

SLAVES AND INDIANS
While some slaves who fought for the Patriot cause received their freedom, revolutionary leaders—unlike
the British—did not grant such slaves their freedom as a matter of course. Washington, the owner of more
than two hundred slaves during the Revolution, refused to let slaves serve in the army, although he did
allow free blacks. (In his will, Washington did free his slaves.) In the new United States, the Revolution
largely reinforced a racial identity based on skin color. Whiteness, now a national identity, denoted
freedom and stood as the key to power. Blackness, more than ever before, denoted servile status. Indeed,
despite their class and ethnic differences, white revolutionaries stood mostly united in their hostility to
both blacks and Indians.
For slaves willing to run away and join the British, the American Revolution offered a unique occasion
to escape bondage. Of the half a million slaves in the American colonies during the Revolution, twenty
thousand joined the British cause. At Yorktown, for instance, thousands of black troops fought with
Lord Cornwallis. Slaves belonging to George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Patrick Henry, and other
revolutionaries seized the opportunity for freedom and fled to the British side. Between ten and twenty
thousand slaves gained their freedom because of the Revolution; arguably, the Revolution created the
largest slave uprising and the greatest emancipation until the Civil War. After the Revolution, some of
these African Loyalists emigrated to Sierra Leone on the west coast of Africa. Others removed to Canada
and England. It is also true that people of color made heroic contributions to the cause of American
independence. However, while the British offered slaves freedom, most American revolutionaries clung to
notions of black inferiority.
Powerful Indian peoples who had allied themselves with the British, including the Mohawk and the
Creek, also remained loyal to the Empire. A Mohawk named Joseph Brant, whose given name was
Thayendanegea (Figure 6.20), rose to prominence while fighting for the British during the Revolution. He
joined forces with Colonel Barry St. Leger during the 1777 campaign, which ended with the surrender of
General Burgoyne at Saratoga. After the war, Brant moved to the Six Nations reserve in Canada. From
his home on the shores of Lake Ontario, he remained active in efforts to restrict white encroachment onto
Indian lands. After their defeat, the British did not keep promises they’d made to help their Indian allies
keep their territory; in fact, the Treaty of Paris granted the United States huge amounts of supposedly
British-owned regions that were actually Indian lands.

PATRIOTS
The American revolutionaries (also called Patriots or Whigs) came from many different backgrounds and
included merchants, shoemakers, farmers, and sailors. What is extraordinary is the way in which the
struggle for independence brought a vast cross-section of society together, animated by a common cause.
During the war, the revolutionaries faced great difficulties, including massive supply problems; clothing,
ammunition, tents, and equipment were all hard to come by. After an initial burst of enthusiasm in 1775
and 1776, the shortage of supplies became acute in 1777 through 1779, as Washington’s difficult winter at
Valley Forge demonstrates.
Funding the war effort also proved very difficult. Whereas the British could pay in gold and silver,
the American forces relied on paper money, backed by loans obtained in Europe. This first American
money was called Continental currency; unfortunately, it quickly fell in value. “Not worth a Continental”
soon became a shorthand term for something of no value. The new revolutionary government printed a
great amount of this paper money, resulting in runaway inflation. By 1781, inflation was such that 146
Continental dollars were worth only one dollar in gold. The problem grew worse as each former colony,
now a revolutionary state, printed its own currency.

WOMEN
In colonial America, women shouldered enormous domestic and child-rearing responsibilities. The war
for independence only increased their workload and, in some ways, solidified their roles. Rebel leaders
required women to produce articles for war—everything from clothing to foodstuffs—while also keeping
their homesteads going. This was not an easy task when their husbands and sons were away fighting.
Women were also expected to provide food and lodging for armies and to nurse wounded soldiers.
The Revolution opened some new doors for women, however, as they took on public roles usually
reserved for men. The Daughters of Liberty, an informal organization formed in the mid-1760s to oppose
British revenue-raising measures, worked tirelessly to support the war effort. Esther DeBerdt Reed of
Philadelphia, wife of Governor Joseph Reed, formed the Ladies Association of Philadelphia and led a
fundraising drive to provide sorely needed supplies to the Continental Army. In “The Sentiments of an
American Woman” (1780), she wrote to other women, “The time is arrived to display the same sentiments
which animated us at the beginning of the Revolution, when we renounced the use of teas, however
agreeable to our taste, rather than receive them from our persecutors; when we made it appear to them
that we placed former necessaries in the rank of superfluities, when our liberty was interested; when our
republican and laborious hands spun the flax, prepared the linen intended for the use of our soldiers; when
exiles and fugitives we supported with courage all the evils which are the concomitants of war.” Reed and
other elite women in Philadelphia raised almost $300,000 in Continental money for the war.
Women who did not share Reed’s elite status nevertheless played key economic roles by producing
homespun cloth and food. During shortages, some women formed mobs and wrested supplies from those
who hoarded them. Crowds of women beset merchants and demanded fair prices for goods; if a merchant
refused, a riot would ensue. Still other women accompanied the army as “camp followers,” serving as
cooks, washerwomen, and nurses. A few also took part in combat and proved their equality with men
through violence against the hated British.
