26.1 The Rise of Franklin Roosevelt

THE ELECTION OF FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT
By the 1932 presidential election, Hoover’s popularity was at an all-time low. Despite his efforts to address
the hardships that many Americans faced, his ineffectual response to the Great Depression left Americans
angry and ready for change. Franklin Roosevelt, though born to wealth and educated at the best schools,
offered the change people sought. His experience in politics had previously included a seat in the New
York State legislature, a vice-presidential nomination, and a stint as governor of New York. During the
latter, he introduced many state-level reforms that later formed the basis of his New Deal as well as
worked with several advisors who later formed the Brains Trust that advised his federal agenda.

Roosevelt exuded confidence, which the American public desperately wished to see in their leader (Figure
26.3). And, despite his affluence, Americans felt that he could relate to their suffering due to his own
physical hardships; he had been struck with polio a decade earlier and was essentially paralyzed from
the waist down for the remainder of his life. Roosevelt understood that the public sympathized with his
ailment; he likewise developed a genuine empathy for public suffering as a result of his illness. However,
he never wanted to be photographed in his wheelchair or appear infirm in any way, for fear that the
public’s sympathy would transform into concern over his physical ability to discharge the duties of the
Oval Office.

Roosevelt also recognized the need to convey to the voting public that he was not simply another
member of the political aristocracy. At a time when the country not only faced its most severe economic
challenges to date, but Americans began to question some of the fundamental principles of capitalism
and democracy, Roosevelt sought to show that he was different—that he could defy expectations—and
through his actions could find creative solutions to address the nation’s problems while restoring public
confidence in fundamental American values. As a result, he not only was the first presidential candidate
to appear in person at a national political convention to accept his party’s nomination but also flew there
through terrible weather from New York to Chicago in order to do so—a risky venture in what was still the
early stages of flight as public transportation. At the Democratic National Convention in 1932, he coined
the famous phrase: “I pledge myself to a new deal for the American people.” The New Deal did not yet
exist, but to the American people, any positive and optimistic response to the Great Depression was a
welcome one.
Hoover assumed at first that Roosevelt would be easy to defeat, confident that he could never carry the
eastern states and the business vote. He was sorely mistaken. Everywhere he went, Hoover was met with
antagonism; anti-Hoover signs and protests were the norm. Hoover’s public persona declined rapidly.
Many news accounts reported that he seemed physically unwell, with an ashen face and shaking hands.
Often, he seemed as though he would faint, and an aide constantly remained nearby with a chair in case
he fell. In contrast, Roosevelt thrived on the campaign. He commented, “I have looked into the faces of
thousands of Americans, and they have the frightened look of lost children.”
The election results that November were never really in question: With three million more people voting
than in 1928, Roosevelt won by a popular count of twenty-three million to fifteen million. He carried all but
six states while winning over 57 percent of the popular vote. Whether they voted due to animosity towards
Hoover for his relative inactivity, or out of hope for what Roosevelt would accomplish, the American
public committed themselves to a new vision. Historians identify this election as the beginning of a new
Democratic coalition, bringing together African Americans, other ethnic minorities, and organized labor as
a voting bloc upon whom the party would rely for many of its electoral victories over the next fifty years.
Unlike some European nations where similar challenges caused democratic constitutions to crumble and
give way to radical ideologies and authoritarian governments, the Roosevelt administration changed the
nation’s economic fortunes with reforms, preserved the constitution, and expanded rather than limited the
reach of democratic principles into the market economy. As a result, radical alternatives, such as the Fascist
movement or Communist Party, remained on the margins of the nation’s political culture.

THE INTERREGNUM
After the landslide election, the country—and Hoover—had to endure the interregnum, the difficult four
months between the election and President Roosevelt’s inauguration in March 1933. Congress did not pass
a single significant piece of legislation during this period, although Hoover spent much of the time trying
to get Roosevelt to commit publicly to a legislative agenda of Hoover’s choosing. Roosevelt remained
gracious but refused to begin his administration as the incumbent’s advisor without any legal authority
necessary to change policy. Unwilling to tie himself to Hoover’s legacy of failed policies, Roosevelt kept
quiet when Hoover supported the passage of a national sales tax. Meanwhile, the country suffered from
Hoover’s inability to further drive a legislative agenda through Congress. It was the worst winter since
the beginning of the Great Depression, and the banking sector once again suffered another round of
panics. While Roosevelt kept his distance from the final tremors of the Hoover administration, the country
continued to suffer in wait. In part as a response to the challenges of this time, the U.S. Constitution was
subsequently amended to reduce the period from election to inauguration to the now-commonplace two
months.
Any ideas that Roosevelt held almost did not come to fruition, thanks to a would-be assassin’s bullet.
On February 15, 1933, after delivering a speech from his open car in Miami’s Bayfront Park, local Italian
bricklayer Giuseppe Zangara emerged from a crowd of well-wishers to fire six shots from his revolver.
Although Roosevelt emerged from the assassination attempt unscathed, Zangara wounded five
individuals that day, including Chicago Mayor Tony Cermak, who attended the speech in the hopes of
resolving any long-standing differences with the president-elect. Roosevelt and his driver immediately
rushed Cermak to the hospital where he died 19 days later. Roosevelt’s calm and collected response to the
event reassured many Americans of his ability to lead the nation through the challenges they faced. All
that awaited was Roosevelt’s inauguration before his ideas would unfold to the expectant public.
So what was Roosevelt’s plan? Before he took office, it seems likely that he was not entirely sure. Certain
elements were known: He believed in positive government action to solve the Depression; he believed
in federal relief, public works, social security, and unemployment insurance; he wanted to restore public
confidence in banks; he wanted stronger government regulation of the economy; and he wanted to
directly help farmers. But how to take action on these beliefs was more in question. A month before his
inauguration, he said to his advisors, “Let’s concentrate upon one thing: Save the people and the nation,
and if we have to change our minds twice every day to accomplish that end, we should do it.”
Unlike Hoover, who professed an ideology of “American individualism,” an adherence that rendered
him largely incapable of widespread action, Roosevelt remained pragmatic and open-minded to possible
solutions. To assist in formulating a variety of relief and recovery programs, Roosevelt turned to a
group of men who had previously orchestrated his election campaign and victory. Collectively known
as the “Brains Trust” (a phrase coined by a New York Times reporter to describe the multiple “brains”
on Roosevelt’s advisory team), the group most notably included Rexford Tugwell, Raymond Moley, and
Adolph Berle. Moley, credited with bringing the group into existence, was a government professor who
advocated for a new national tax policy to help the nation recover from its economic woes. Tugwell, who
eventually focused his energy on the country’s agricultural problems, saw an increased role for the federal
government in setting wages and prices across the economy. Berle was a mediating influence, who often
advised against a centrally controlled economy, but did see the role that the federal government could
play in mediating the stark cycles of prosperity and depression that, if left unchecked, could result in the
very situation in which the country presently found itself. Together, these men, along with others, advised
Roosevelt through the earliest days of the New Deal and helped to craft significant legislative programs
for congressional review and approval.

INAUGURATION DAY: A NEW BEGINNING
March 4, 1933, dawned gray and rainy. Roosevelt rode in an open car along with outgoing president
Hoover, facing the public, as he made his way to the U.S. Capitol. Hoover’s mood was somber, still
personally angry over his defeat in the general election the previous November; he refused to crack a
smile at all during the ride among the crowd, despite Roosevelt’s urging to the contrary. At the ceremony,
Roosevelt rose with the aid of leg braces equipped under his specially tailored trousers and placed his
hand on a Dutch family Bible as he took his solemn oath. At that very moment, the rain stopped and the
sun began to shine directly on the platform, and those present would later claim that it was as though God
himself was shining down on Roosevelt and the American people in that moment (Figure 26.4).
Bathed in the sunlight, Roosevelt delivered one of the most famous and oft-quoted inaugural addresses
in history. He encouraged Americans to work with him to find solutions to the nation’s problems and not
to be paralyzed by fear into inaction. Borrowing a wartime analogy provided by Moley, who served as
his speechwriter at the time, Roosevelt called upon all Americans to assemble and fight an essential battle
against the forces of economic depression. He famously stated, “The only thing we have to fear is fear
itself.” Upon hearing his inaugural address, one observer in the crowd later commented, “Any man who
can talk like that in times like these is worth every ounce of support a true American has.” To borrow the
popular song title of the day, “happy days were here again.” Foregoing the traditional inaugural parties,
the new president immediately returned to the White House to begin his work to save the nation.

