10.4 Indian Removal

INDIANS IN POPULAR CULTURE
Popular culture in the first half of the nineteenth century reflected the aversion to Indians that was
pervasive during the Age of Jackson. Jackson skillfully played upon this racial hatred to engage the United
States in a policy of ethnic cleansing, eradicating the Indian presence from the land to make way for white
civilization.
In an age of mass democracy, powerful anti-Indian sentiments found expression in mass culture, shaping
popular perceptions. James Fenimore Cooper’s very popular historical novel, The Last of the Mohicans,
published in 1826 as part of his Leatherstocking series, told the tale of Nathaniel “Natty” Bumppo (aka
Hawkeye), who lived among Indians but had been born to white parents. Cooper provides a romantic
version of the French and Indian War in which Natty helps the British against the French and the feral,
bloodthirsty Huron. Natty endures even as his Indian friends die, including the noble Uncas, the last
Mohican, in a narrative that dovetailed with most people’s approval of Indian removal.
Indians also made frequent appearances in art. George Catlin produced many paintings of native peoples,
which he offered as true representations despite routinely emphasizing their supposed savage nature. The
Cutting Scene, Mandan O-kee-pa Ceremony (Figure 10.12) is one example. Scholars have long questioned
the accuracy of this portrayal of a rite of passage among the Mandan people. Accuracy aside, the painting
captured the imaginations of white viewers, reinforcing their disgust at the savagery of Indians.


THE INDIAN REMOVAL ACT
In his first message to Congress, Jackson had proclaimed that Indian groups living independently within
states, as sovereign entities, presented a major problem for state sovereignty. This message referred
directly to the situation in Georgia, Mississippi, and Alabama, where the Creek, Choctaw, Chickasaw,
Seminole, and Cherokee peoples stood as obstacles to white settlement. These groups were known as the
Five Civilized Tribes, because they had largely adopted Anglo-American culture, speaking English and
practicing Christianity. Some held slaves like their white counterparts.
Whites especially resented the Cherokee in Georgia, coveting the tribe’s rich agricultural lands in the
northern part of the state. The impulse to remove the Cherokee only increased when gold was discovered
on their lands. Ironically, while whites insisted the Cherokee and other native peoples could never be good
citizens because of their savage ways, the Cherokee had arguably gone farther than any other indigenous
group in adopting white culture. The Cherokee Phoenix, the newspaper of the Cherokee, began publication
in 1828 (Figure 10.14) in English and the Cherokee language. Although the Cherokee followed the lead
of their white neighbors by farming and owning property, as well as embracing Christianity and owning
their own slaves, this proved of little consequence in an era when whites perceived all Indians as incapable
of becoming full citizens of the republic.

Jackson’s anti-Indian stance struck a chord with a majority of white citizens, many of whom shared a
hatred of nonwhites that spurred Congress to pass the 1830 Indian Removal Act. The act called for the
removal of the Five Civilized Tribes from their home in the southeastern United States to land in the
West, in present-day Oklahoma. Jackson declared in December 1830, “It gives me pleasure to announce to
Congress that the benevolent policy of the Government, steadily pursued for nearly thirty years, in relation
to the removal of the Indians beyond the white settlements is approaching to a happy consummation. Two
important tribes have accepted the provision made for their removal at the last session of Congress, and it
is believed that their example will induce the remaining tribes also to seek the same obvious advantages.”
The Cherokee decided to fight the federal law, however, and took their case to the Supreme Court.
Their legal fight had the support of anti-Jackson members of Congress, including Henry Clay and Daniel
Webster, and they retained the legal services of former attorney general William Wirt. In Cherokee Nation v.
Georgia, Wirt argued that the Cherokee constituted an independent foreign nation, and that an injunction
(a stop) should be placed on Georgia laws aimed at eradicating them. In 1831, the Supreme Court found
the Cherokee did not meet the criteria for being a foreign nation.
Another case involving the Cherokee also found its way to the highest court in the land. This legal
struggle—Worcester v. Georgia—asserted the rights of non-natives to live on Indian lands. Samuel
Worcester was a Christian missionary and federal postmaster of New Echota, the capital of the Cherokee
nation. A Congregationalist, he had gone to live among the Cherokee in Georgia to further the spread of
Christianity, and he strongly opposed Indian removal.
By living among the Cherokee, Worcester had violated a Georgia law forbidding whites, unless they
were agents of the federal government, to live in Indian territory. Worcester was arrested, but because
his federal job as postmaster gave him the right to live there, he was released. Jackson supporters then
succeeded in taking away Worcester’s job, and he was re-arrested. This time, a court sentenced him and
nine others for violating the Georgia state law banning whites from living on Indian land. Worcester was
sentenced to four years of hard labor. When the case of Worcester v. Georgia came before the Supreme Court
in 1832, Chief Justice John Marshall ruled in favor of Worcester, finding that the Cherokee constituted
“distinct political communities” with sovereign rights to their own territory.


The Supreme Court did not have the power to enforce its ruling in Worcester v. Georgia, however, and
it became clear that the Cherokee would be compelled to move. Those who understood that the only
option was removal traveled west, but the majority stayed on their land. In order to remove them, the
president relied on the U.S. military. In a series of forced marches, some fifteen thousand Cherokee were
finally relocated to Oklahoma. This forced migration, known as the Trail of Tears, caused the deaths of as
many as four thousand Cherokee (Figure 10.15). The Creek, Choctaw, Chickasaw, and Seminole peoples
were also compelled to go. The removal of the Five Civilized Tribes provides an example of the power of
majority opinion in a democracy.

BLACK HAWK’S WAR
The policy of removal led some Indians to actively resist. In 1832, the Fox and the Sauk, led by Sauk chief
Black Hawk (Makataimeshekiakiah), moved back across the Mississippi River to reclaim their ancestral
home in northern Illinois. A brief war in 1832, Black Hawk’s War, ensued. White settlers panicked at the
return of the native peoples, and militias and federal troops quickly mobilized. At the Battle of Bad Axe
(also known as the Bad Axe Massacre), they killed over two hundred men, women, and children. Some
seventy white settlers and soldiers also lost their lives in the conflict (Figure 10.16). The war, which lasted
only a matter of weeks, illustrates how much whites on the frontier hated and feared Indians during the
Age of Jackson.

