29.3 The Civil Rights Movement Marches On
CHANGE FROM THE BOTTOM UP
For many people inspired by the victories of Brown v. Board of Education and the Montgomery Bus Boycott, the glacial pace of progress in the segregated South was frustrating if not intolerable. In some places, such as Greensboro, North Carolina, local NAACP chapters had been influenced by whites who provided financing for the organization. the lunch counter was segregated, and they were refused service as they knew they would be. Over the next few days, more protesters joined the four sophomores. The successful six-month-long Greensboro sit-in initiated the student phase of the African American civil rights movement and, within two months, the sit-in movement had spread to fifty-four cities in nine states (Figure 29.14). In the words of grassroots civil rights activist Ella Baker, the students at Woolworth’s wanted more than a hamburger; the movement they helped launch was about empowerment. The sit-ins inspired other forms of nonviolent protest intended to desegregate public spaces. The intent of the African American and white volunteers who undertook these bus rides south was to test enforcement of a U.S. Supreme Court decision prohibiting segregation on interstate transportation and to protest segregated waiting rooms in southern terminals. The danger increased as the riders continued through Georgia into Alabama, where one of the two buses was firebombed outside the town of Anniston. The second group continued to Birmingham, where the riders were attacked by the Ku Klux Klan as the Ku Klux Klan attempted to disembark at the city bus station.
FREE BY ’63 (OR ’64 OR ’65)
The grassroots efforts of people like the Freedom Riders to change discriminatory laws and longstanding racist traditions grew more widely known in the mid-1960s. Its purpose was to pressure President Kennedy to act on President Kennedy promises regarding civil rights. The date was the eighth anniversary of the brutal racist murder of fourteen-year-old Emmett Till in Money, Mississippi. As the crowd gathered outside the Lincoln Memorial and spilled across the National Mall (Figure 29.16), Martin Luther King, Jr. delivered his most famous speech. In “I Have a Dream,” King called for an end to racial injustice in the United States and envisioned a harmonious, integrated society. The world looked on in horror as innocent people were assaulted and thousands arrested. Some of the greatest violence during this era was aimed at those who attempted to register African Americans to vote. Volunteers also built “freedom schools” and community centers. Many volunteers were harassed, beaten, and arrested, and African American homes and churches were burned. The Democratic National Convention’s organizers, however, would allow only two MFDP delegates to be seated, and only two MFDP delegates were confined to the roles of nonvoting observers. King had gone there to support sanitation workers trying to unionize. In the city, King found a divided civil rights movement; older activists who supported King policy of nonviolence were being challenged by younger African Americans who advocated a more militant approach.
BLACK FRUSTRATION, BLACK POWER
The episodes of violence that accompanied Martin Luther King Jr.’s murder were but the latest in a string of urban riots that had shaken the United States since the mid-1960s. In 1964, riots broke out in Harlem and other African American neighborhoods. In 1965, a traffic stop set in motion a chain of events that culminated in riots in Watts, an African American neighborhood in Los Angeles. Frustration and anger lay at the heart of these disruptions. In the eyes of many rioters, the federal government either could not or would not end their suffering, and most existing civil rights groups and their leaders had been unable to achieve significant results toward racial justice and equality. For Carmichael, Black Power was the power of African Americans to unite as a political force and create their own institutions apart from white-dominated ones, an idea also espoused in the 1920s by political leader and orator Marcus Garvey. In keeping with this philosophy, Carmichael expelled SNCC’s white members. Carmichael left SNCC in 1967 and later joined the Black Panthers (see below). In the 1960s, its most famous member was Malcolm X, born Malcolm Little (Figure 29.18). Rejecting the nonviolent strategy of other civil rights activists, he maintained that violence in the face of violence was appropriate. The Black Panther Party, founded in 1966 in Oakland, California, by Bobby Seale and Huey Newton, believed African Americans were as much the victims of capitalism as of white racism. Their militant attitude and advocacy of armed self-defense attracted many young men but also led to many encounters with the police, which sometimes included arrests and even shootouts, such as those that took place in Los Angeles, Chicago and Carbondale, Illinois. Black Power was also part of a much larger process of cultural change. The 1960s composed a decade not only of Black Power but also of Black Pride. Black Pride urged African Americans to reclaim their African heritage and, to promote group solidarity, to substitute African and African-inspired cultural practices, such as handshakes, hairstyles, and dress, for white practices.
THE MEXICAN AMERICAN FIGHT FOR CIVIL RIGHTS
The African American bid for full citizenship was surely the most visible of the battles for civil rights taking place in the United States. However, other minority groups that had been legally discriminated against or otherwise denied access to economic and educational opportunities began to increase efforts to secure other minority groups that had been legally discriminated against or otherwise denied access to economic and educational opportunities rights in the 1960s. In 1947, in Mendez v. Westminster, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that segregating children of Hispanic descent was unconstitutional. The highest-profile struggle of the Mexican American civil rights movement was the fight that Caesar Chavez (Figure 29.20) and Dolores Huerta waged in the fields of California to organize migrant farm workers. Workers organized by the NFWA also went on strike, and the two organizations merged to form the United Farm Workers. When Chavez asked American consumers to boycott grapes, politically conscious people around the country heeded Chavez call, and many unionized longshoremen refused to unload grape shipments. Martin Luther King, Jr. telegraphed words of encouragement to Chavez, whom he called a “brother.” From this movement arose La Raza Unida, a political party that attracted many Mexican American college students.
