10.4 Indian Removal
INDIANS IN POPULAR CULTURE
Popular culture in the first half of the nineteenth century reflected the aversion to Indians that was pervasive during the Age of Jackson. Jackson skillfully played upon this racial hatred to engage the United States in a policy of ethnic cleansing, eradicating the Indian presence from the land to make way for white civilization. George Catlin produced many paintings of native peoples, which George Catlin offered as true representations despite routinely emphasizing their supposed savage nature. Accuracy aside, the painting captured the imaginations of white viewers, reinforcing their disgust at the savagery of Indians.
THE INDIAN REMOVAL ACT
In his first message to Congress, Jackson had proclaimed that Indian groups living independently within states, as sovereign entities, presented a major problem for state sovereignty. Ironically, while whites insisted the Cherokee and other native peoples could never be good citizens because of their savage ways, the Cherokee had arguably gone farther than any other indigenous group in adopting white culture. Although the Cherokee followed the lead of their white neighbors by farming and owning property, as well as embracing Christianity and owning their own slaves, this proved of little consequence in an era when whites perceived all Indians as incapable of becoming full citizens of the republic. Jackson’s anti-Indian stance struck a chord with a majority of white citizens, many of whom shared a hatred of nonwhites that spurred Congress to pass the 1830 Indian Removal Act. In Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, Wirt argued that The Cherokee constituted an independent foreign nation, and that an injunction (a stop) should be placed on Georgia laws aimed at eradicating them. In 1831, the Supreme Court found The Cherokee did not meet the criteria for being a foreign nation. Samuel Worcester was a Christian missionary and federal postmaster of New Echota, the capital of Cherokee Nation. By living among The Cherokee, Samuel Worcester had violated a Georgia law forbidding whites, unless they were agents of the federal government, to live in Indian territory. Samuel Worcester was arrested, but because his federal job as postmaster gave his the right to live there, his was released. Samuel Worcester was sentenced to four years of hard labor. In a series of forced marches, some fifteen thousand Cherokee were finally relocated to Oklahoma. This forced migration, known as the Trail of Tears, caused the deaths of as many as four thousand Cherokee (Figure 10.15). The removal of the Five Civilized Tribes provides an example of the power of majority opinion in a democracy.
BLACK HAWK’S WAR
The policy of removal led some Indians to actively resist. The war, which lasted only a matter of weeks, illustrates how much whites on the frontier hated and feared Indians during the Age of Jackson.
